This is Deren Lisl and welcome to an introduction to 3D modeling in Blendr I've been teaching 3D animation
at the college level for quite a few years now and I've noticed that many people complain about the
complexity or the difficulty of learning Blendr or learning 3-D modeling.
And oftentimes I feel that it's simply because they didn't have that kind of fundamental foundation
before they took off and they started trying to model an F-16 or something like that.
I think there are certain fundamental things that it's good to know and I hope to go over those in this
series.
So first of all if you're new to Blendr let me just quickly go over the navigation and the interface.
It looks a lot more complex than it is but let's just begin with navigating in 3D space.
I'm just going to use the middle mouse button and I'm going to click and drag and in doing that I can
tumble around if I hold the shift key down and press the middle mouse button and click and drag I can
pan and if I hold the control button down and hold the middle mouse button and move the mouse up and
down like that I can zoom in and out and I can also zoom in and out with the scroll wheel.
The next thing is selecting objects and by default this is done with the right mouse button.
So usually with most programs you select things with the left mouse button with Blender it's the complete
opposite.
It's the right one.
However if this seems very strange to you you can always change that by going over to the File menu
coming over the user preferences and you can change the select with from right to the left mouse button.
I suggest that if you're new to Blender go ahead and switch this and then click on Save user settings
and then close the window here.
I'm going to stick with the right because I've been doing it for years and I'm kind of old school here.
Now when you first open blender you've got a default cube here on the grid you can view this cube in
a couple of ways.
One is if you hit the Z key on the keyboard it'll change to wireframe.
And if you hit the Z key again it'll change back to shaded view.
Now you can change that.
Also down here as well with the viewport shading menu to move this cube around we can use the manipulator
gizmo's here.
The move manipulator is currently active.
I can change it here to rotate and scale but I can also use the shortcut keys g to move and then click
with the left mouse button I can press R and move the mouse to rotate it and then click again with the
left mouse button to complete the tool or click with the right mouse button to activate it.
And of course I can press the s key and scale the object in and out as well and I'll press the left
mouse button to confirm the tool.
Now you can also constrain the movement to a particular axis so let's say I wanted to move this object
only in the y axis or this green axis here you can see the axes.
Down here the x y and z x is red y as green Z is blue.
But if I wanted to move this in the y axis I could just press g and then immediately hit the y axis.
And now I can move it in only the y axis and I'll click to confirm it in the same way I can press the
R key and press the Y key.
And now I can only rotate that object around the y axis.
And scaling works in much the same way say I wanted to scale this in the y axis as well so I can hit
s and press Y.
And now I can scale it in that axis only.
Now you may find in other programs that the x y and z axis is a little bit differently configured in
Blendr the z axis is the up axis.
In many other programs the y axis is the axis.
And that really only gets confusing if you're trying to export objects and move them to another program.
If you're going to be staying in Blendr for pretty much all your three-D work it really won't matter.
Now there are a couple of other shortcut keys that she should know.
One is the T key.
If I press the T key on the keyboard you can see that the Tools panel over here closes and opens.
So that's an easy way to hide that.
Another keyboard shortcut that opens up a panel is the N key on the keyboard.
And if I press the end key and then open up the properties panel over here and one of the most important
features of the properties panel is the transform fields here the location rotation scale and even the
dimensions.
So you can even input values here into these fields to move rotate and scale your object.
So let's say I wanted to get the scale of the object back to the way it was when it was a cube.
I can click and drag these fields here and change all of the scale fields back to one I can zero out
the rotation.
So I had rotated it in the y axis 0 0 0 that out here and I can take the location back to zero as well
with the X Y and Z click and drag those hit the zero key and hit enter.
And now my cube is back to the way it was when it was first created.
Notice that even though the scale is at one the dimensions are two two and two and that refers to the
grid units or the default grid units in Blendr these grid units don't really coincide with anything
in the real world.
However they most closely resemble meters I should say.
If I come over here to this button here the scene button on the properties window you can see I've got
units and right now there is none which means we're just using the Blendr default units.
We can change it to metric and you can see not much changes here except meters up here and two meters
here or we can change it to the imperial system of inches and feet and then you can see the grid has
shrunk quite a bit and we've changed the feet here and feet and inches here.
Now Actually these aren't quite inches they're just decimals but I can change this to separate units
here.
And now you can see it's got six feet.
Six point seven inches.
But generally speaking I usually work with just the blender default units.
Now another couple of shortcut keys we should talk about.
I'm going to switch to the move tool here.
If I move this cube up I can always undo it by pressing control or command Z to undo if I hit the period
key on the number pad.
I'll zoom in to the selected object and that object will now become the center of rotation around which
I tumble so if I zoom out here select the camera press the period key on the number pad.
I'll now zoom or excuse me tumble around that camera.
Now if you do not have a number pad if you're working on a laptop.
One thing you can do is come over here to the file user preferences menu option and you can turn on
emulate numpad.
I have this turned on as it is just in case I don't have my little external number pad with me.
I work on a laptop as well and so I keep this turned on so I can use either the numbers at the top of
the keyboard or I can use my external number pad and then be sure and click save user settings.
Now the reason why you may need a number pad is so that you can use the different views in Blender.
So if I press the one key on the numpad I switch over to the front perspective view and I can switch
to the front orthographic view by pressing the five key so I can toggle between perspective and orthographic.
Now I can click the middle mouse button and tumble out of this and notice that I'm still in orthographic
I can hit the five key to then come back to perspective.
I can hit the three key to go to the side view and the seven key to go to the top you.
So those are the main buttons you'll use on the number pad the period key and then the 1 3 5 and 7 keys.
Well in the next video we'll take a look at the differences between object mode and edit mode.
And we'll talk about the transform tools.